# W271 Final Project
##UC Berkeley MIDS W271 (Fall 2016) Final Project
_Burt, D.M. | Pelkey, S. | Pera, M. | Sanders, J._



###What is Driving the Cost of Care? A Study of the Impact of Local Market Competition on Hospital Inpatient Charges

__Medical costs in the United States are rising.__ Between 2011 and 2014, general inflation in the United States slowed from 3.2% to 1.6%, while hospital and related services slowed from 5.6% to 4.6% (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2012, 2013, 2014). The increase in cost of medical care has long outpaced the increases in costs of all goods and services in the U.S., and at an estimated $3 trillion in national health expenditures (National Center for Health Statistics, 2016), this difference in inflation is significant. With an aging Baby Boomer population, Medicare spending has doubled as a proportion of total health care expenditure between 1970 and 2014, from 10.1% to 20.2%. In essence, medical cost inflation is higher than general inflation in a population getting increasingly older.

Hospitals seek to cover the expenses across the wide range of services they provide by adjusting what they charge for those services. They cannot charge different amounts to different people, regardless of who pays, whether the patient is covered by Medicaid, by Medicare, by a private insurer, or if the patient pays out of their own pocket. Of course, not every payor is expected to reimburse the hospital the same amount: Medicaid generally pays relatively little, while Medicare pays a bit more, and private payers generally pay even more, and all of these insurers pay less than what the hospital charges. These insurers pay according to different reimbursement methodologies, but these methodologies typically are sensitive to the charges in order to adequately cover unusually high-cost hospital stays (through “outlier” or “stoploss” payments). It could thus be advantageous to a hospital to increase charges to a level that could trigger some of these higher alternative outlier payments and increase revenue surplus. There are significant downsides to such an approach, however—those patients who must pay out-of-pocket are expected to pay the full charges, leading to a lessened quantity demanded for those services, and some insurers may similarly seek to divert patients to other nearby hospitals. All the while, a hospital’s own costs change over time: local wages and overhead costs are subject to market conditions, and new medical technologies are developed every year.  

Can we gain insight into the factors that motivate shifts in hospital charges? Do these factors move in ways that explain an overall charge increase that surpasses general cost inflation? We seek to explore this question using several publicly-available data sets that cover hospital service-level1 charges for the entire set of hospitals in the United States for Medicare inpatient stays between 2011 and 2014. Explanatory variables are available not only from that same data set (in the form of local-market competition charges and service demand), but also from complimentary data sets that describe resource availability and utilization within those same hospitals and their surrounding areas.

Our initial hypothesis is that hospitals, as businesses, set their charges in response to market rates and demand. The use of health care resources is highly localized. Most Americans use the services of hospitals nearby, and it logically follows that a hospital’s charges could be heavily influenced by the charges of its local competitors. We can model the charges in year _y_ as a function of the charges for a hospital in the prior year and charges for other hospitals in the same geographical area in that same prior year, weighted by the number of services provided, and conditioned on other explanatory variables, including the number of employed physicians, nurses, beds, and number of affiliated providers.  Given that different hospitals have different mixes of services, we will standardize the charges using the DRG relative weights applicable to the hospitals' services.
